L’erreur « la synchronisation de toutes les bases de données a échoué (base de données non valide ou corrompue (signature PGP)) » 
indique que Pacman ne parvient pas à vérifier l’authenticité des bases de données de paquets à cause d’un problème avec les signatures PGP.
Ce problème est courant sur Manjaro (et Arch)
et vient généralement d’un souci avec la clé d’authentification locale, une corruption partielle, ou de miroirs temporaires corrompus.

Voici les solutions éprouvées pour corriger cette erreur :

    Supprimer les bases de données corrompues et forcer la resynchronisation :

bash
sudo rm -r /var/lib/pacman/sync/
sudo pacman -Syyu


Partie 2 troubleshoot 


Manjaro System Architecture Overview
Core Components

    Kernel: Rolling kernel updates with options for LTS or experimental branches
    Package Management: Pacman and Pamac with access to AUR and official repositories
    Bootloader: GRUB by default, critical for kernel and initrd selection
    Display Stack: Xorg or Wayland with proprietary or open-source GPU drivers

Update Workflow

System upgrades via pacman -Syu may introduce breaking changes due to rolling releases. Users must manage configuration files, driver compatibility, and kernel versions proactively.
Common Troubleshooting Scenarios
1. System Fails to Boot After Update

Possible causes:

    GRUB misconfiguration
    Broken initramfs
    Kernel or driver incompatibility

Symptoms:

    Stuck at GRUB prompt or black screen
    Error: 'initramfs not found' or 'unable to mount root'

2. Pacman Conflicts and Update Failures

Typical messages:

    “could not satisfy dependencies”
    “conflicting files” or “file exists in filesystem”

Causes:

    Improper AUR usage
    Partially updated system
    Manual package installations

3. X Server or Wayland Crash

Symptoms:

    Blank screen after login
    Looping display manager
    No tty access

Root causes:

    GPU driver misconfiguration
    Display manager incompatibility (e.g., LightDM vs GDM)

4. Wi-Fi or Bluetooth Not Working

Often linked to kernel module regression or firmware mismatch after system upgrade.
Step-by-Step Diagnostics
GRUB and Boot Issues

    Chroot from live USB:

    manjaro-chroot -a

    Reinstall GRUB:

    grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot/efi --bootloader-id=manjaro
    update-grub

    Rebuild initramfs:

    mkinitcpio -P

Resolving Package Conflicts

    Force install when safe:

    pacman -Syu --overwrite "*"

    Remove orphaned packages:

    pacman -Rns $(pacman -Qtdq)

    Clear package cache:

    pamac clean --build-files

GPU Driver Failures

Check current driver status:

mhwd -li

Switch drivers:

mhwd -r pci video-nvidia
mhwd -a pci free 0300

Or reinstall proprietary:

mhwd -i pci video-nvidia

Network Adapter Troubleshooting

Check kernel modules:

lspci -k | grep -A 3 Network

Reload driver:

modprobe -r 
modprobe 

Inspect journal logs:

journalctl -k -g firmware

Architectural Pitfalls
1. Blind Rolling Updates

    Skipping changelogs or ignoring prompts during updates can break critical components
    Always use pacman -Syu from TTY if GUI is unresponsive

2. Overreliance on AUR

    AUR packages are user-contributed and may conflict with official packages
    Prefer Flatpak or Snap for sandboxed application delivery

3. Ignoring Kernel Compatibility

Using a newer kernel without LTS fallback may result in driver or peripheral failures. Always install at least two kernel versions:

mhwd-kernel -i linux-lts

Long-Term Solutions
Implement Update Hygiene

    Use timeshift for pre-update snapshots
    Review /etc/pacman.conf for ignored packages
    Test on staging systems before pushing to production endpoints

Optimize GRUB Configuration

    Enable multiple boot entries for fallback kernels
    Reduce boot delay for faster recovery
    Keep boot partition clean and under 500MB limit

Maintain Driver Integrity

    Use mhwd for GPU/NIC management instead of manual installation
    Pin working driver versions when stability is critical
    Log kernel-module mappings for reproducibility

Conclusion

Manjaro offers cutting-edge features and extensive customization, but with that comes the responsibility of advanced system management. By applying robust diagnostic workflows, maintaining snapshot backups, and proactively managing updates, administrators can harness the power of Manjaro without sacrificing stability. For professionals leveraging Manjaro in DevOps, embedded, or workstation environments, treating it with the same rigor as any production system is key to long-term success.
FAQs
1. How do I recover from a failed Manjaro update?

Boot into a live USB, chroot into your system using manjaro-chroot -a, and rebuild GRUB or initramfs. Use pacman -Syu to complete the interrupted update.
2. Why is my display manager failing after reboot?

Likely due to GPU driver mismatch or misconfigured display manager. Use TTY to remove/reinstall drivers or switch to a compatible DM.
3. How can I safely manage rolling updates?

Enable snapshots with Timeshift, read release announcements, and avoid forced updates without reviewing package changes.
4. Is it safe to use AUR for production systems?

Only if packages are maintained and reviewed. Prefer official repos or containerized alternatives like Flatpak for stability.
5. My Wi-Fi stopped working after a kernel upgrade. What should I do?

Check if the network driver module is loaded. Try switching to an LTS kernel or reinstalling firmware packages.
